Once around Beta
Lyra, Betalyra or Shellac as it's called
is the second brightest star in the very
small constellation of Lyra, the Greek
harp, but it's really quite a faint
star. The bright star Vega is the lead
star for the constellation, but the rest
of them are really really quite modest.
And so beta only comes in at magnitude
3.5 making it a lot fainter. And it's
one corner of the parallelogram that
marks out the body of this
constellation. You can see the four
stars all roughly equal in brightness
there. And in fact, Beta makes an
excellent guide star to go star hopping
across the bottom of the parallelogram
and find the ring nebula M57, which is
marked on the star map
there. Now, in terms of distance, the
Hipparos satellite came out with a
figure of 960 light years. So this is a
lot further away than its brighter
neighbor Vega which is only I think 27
light years away accounting for perhaps
it being seen as relatively faint. But
when we look at it with a telescope and
we got a lovely image on the right and a
closeup here showing that it is a triple
star system. In fact, there are multiple
stars shown in the image there. And
we'll come on to each of them. But the
primary star, the bright one that you
can see there is actually an eclipsing
binary pair. So this is betara a and
it's betalyra a a and the binary pair of
those is a a1 and a a2. So this is
getting complicated.
The star AB was also detected in 2006
just half an arcsec away. So this is a
hierarchical triple. We have
A B and then we have A A1 and A A2. A A
A1 and A A2 are so close together you
can't see them as separate. They make up
the bright dot in the center of the
image. And AA uh sorry AB is just lower
and left of it.
So when we look at the AA star, you get
a fantastic light curve showing how the
brightness changes over time in a 12.9
day cycle. So we have brightenings and
dimmings and you get alternating amounts
of
dimming and this is characteristic of an
eclipsing binary. So you have the two
stars orbiting around each other and
they have different brightnesses. So
when you can see both of them, you get
the full brightness of the object. But
when the bright star goes behind the dim
star, the brightness takes a large drop
as it's eclipsed. And half an orbit
later, the dimmer star goes behind the
bright one, and you lose the light from
that instead. So the light drops to a
lesser degree. And this of course
implies that the orbital plane of the
two stars around each other matches the
line of sight from the earth. And the
data on the right hand side here shows
that very very clearly. But it also
shows something else and that is that
the light never stands still. It's takes
these curved dips but even when it's at
its maximum it's not flat. It rises and
falls all the time. And that isn't usual
for an eclipsing binary. Often the uh
periods between the eclipses are
relatively stable. So that's uh worth
some further attention. And what it's
really telling us is that this is an
incredibly close binary. I love this
image which is showing that you just
can't see anything. Uh the two of them
are so close together that they're
within the central bright area right
into the middle of the image there. We
just can't split them apart with a
telescope like
this. So we have a simulation of what we
think is going on here, which is the two
stars orbiting around creating these
line of sight eclipses as they do so.
But because they are so close together,
there is a distortion of the
uh primary star, the brighter of the two
with a lobe pulled towards its companion
by gravity. And we think that there is
an accumulation of matter around the
secondary
star, a Taurus, a ring around the
center, an accretion disc of matter that
has been transferred from the primary to
the secondary. So the primary reached
the end of its life, swelled up into a
giant, lost control of its outer layers
and about
um over a period we've lost a lot of
material from the primary boosting the
mass of the secondary. And we think that
about um 110,000th of a solar mass is
transferring across every year. So, one
solar mass in 50,000
years. And this is changing the orbital
period of the system. It's gradually
increasing by about 19 seconds each
year. Something that we can actually
measure. But that accretion disc, the
Taurus around the secondary is blocking
our view of it, making it really quite
difficult to understand exactly the
characteristics.
Now I said we couldn't image it directly
with a single telescope but we have been
able to combine several telescopes. The
Charara
array at Georgia State University
consists of a series of telescopes and
they are able to take the light from
each of the small mirrors and combine
them into one central
location and create an intererometer
using this aperture synthesis originally
developed in Cambridge for radio
telescopes by Martin Riyle and then
followed up with the coast project also
in a bunker at the radio observatory
here in Cambridge. Um it's a lovely mad
scientist underground laboratory with
beams of light and lasers and uh lots of
moving mirrors that brings the light
together, brings it back into phase
given the distribution of the separate
mirrors and gives you the effect of one
large
mirror. So we have with the coast I
think it goes at a maximum around 100 m
but Charara built on a larger scale and
with more mirrors can create the effect
of a 330 m diameter mirror giving you
tremendous resolution down to um about a
mill arcsec. And with that we have
created the best
thing in terms of imaging this star beta
lyra. The charara data is on the left.
So it's not a true image. It's an
intererometer picture but it's as close
as you really want. Um, and there's a
little model on the right showing what
we think that is representing in terms
of the black primary and the obscuring
Taurus of matter around the secondary
there. And from that, we've been able to
compute a very good orbital position and
uh uh the orbital period of just over
12.8
days and indeed work out the mass of the
objects. So the primary the donor star
around about 12.8 solar masses and the
secondary that's gaining mass 2.8. So
quite a big difference between them. And
the data has been accumulated and turned
into a lovely animation of these two
whizzing around each other. highly sped
up of course takes uh 12 days to go
round but uh you can see the two and you
can almost imagine this showing the
matter being transferred from one to the
other. So that's the AA1 and
AA2 interacting binary and they're
described in as semi- detached because
essentially the envelope of one is in
contact with the envelope of the other.
They're so close
together. Now, there are additional
components that I said I'd mention, and
they are given the letters uh A, B, C,
D, E, and F. And the A, B, and F members
do seem to be physically
associated. And the GIA spacecraft has
identified them as part of a co-moving
group GIA 8 with about a hundred other
members moving AC across the uh galaxy
moving around in an orbit that suggests
that they were all formed together
around about 30 to 100 million years ago
in a cluster together. Um and so we have
some statistics on these. We know that
uh the B star is uh a fairly massive
uh B7V. So main sequence star of class
B7 and uh about 80 times the power
output of our sun. The F star, well
that's a little cooler. It's an Aclass
star, although Gia lists this as
uh G. So this is quite curious that we
have two different classifications for
this something which I want to look into
further. Um so so uh it's classed as A
it's classed as G and it's classed as AM
in another paper. The M just stands for
peculiarity of its metal composition. So
they're agreeing with the A category.
Um, and it seems likely that this
cluster formed around 30 to 100 million
years ago because so far none of the
stars that have been observed in this
Gaia 8 co-moving group are giant branch
stars. So, they're all not yet evolved
into that phase of their existence,
which suggests that they can't be
particularly old cuz some of them are
fairly massive and uh would perhaps
after a 100 million years turn off onto
the giant branch. Now the other stars C,
D, and E, sadly they turned out to be
just ordinary line of sight effects and
at different distances uh between three
times closer and three times further
away than the rest. So although the
stars that you can see A, B, C, D, E,
and F look like they're part of a
multiple system, they're not. Only half
of them are. But Gia has shown us that
there are hundred others and revealed
this cluster origin. So fascinating
system. So that's uh one trip around
Beta Lyra and it's often a target for
our public observing evenings here at
the University of Cambridge when we turn
our telescopes armed with cameras onto
this and reveal some of these very
interesting stars. Thanks very much for
listening.